feat: add blog 'Stop Forwarding Errors, Start Designing Them' (#12)
fast/fastblog: src/content/post/stop-forwarding-errors-start-designing-them.mdx

---
title: "Stop Forwarding Errors, Start Designing Them"
tags:
  - Error Handling
pubDate: 2026-01-04
---

It's 3am. Production is down. You're staring at a log line that says:

```text
Error: serialization error: expected ',' or '}' at line 3, column 7
```

You know JSON is broke. But you have zero idea *why*, *where*, or *who* caused it. Was it the config loader? The user API? The webhook consumer?

The error has successfully bubbled up through 20 layers of your stack, preserving its original message perfectly, yet losing every scrap of meaning along the way.

> We have a name for this. We call it "Error Handling." But in reality, it's just **Error Forwarding**. We treat errors like hot potatoes--catch them, wrap them (maybe), and throw them up the stack as fast as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a name for this. We call it "Error Handling." But the instance above is no more than **Error Forwarding**. We treat errors like hot potatoes — catch them, wrap them (maybe), and throw them up the stack as fast as possible.
```

You add a `println!`, restart the service, wait for the bug to reproduce. It's going to be a long night.

> As noted in a [detailed analysis of error handling in RisingWave](https://bugenzhao.com/2024/04/24/error-handling-1/), a large Rust project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As noted in the [detailed analysis of error handling in a large Rust project](https://bugenzhao.com/2024/04/24/error-handling-1/):
```

> "There're tons of opinionated articles or libraries promoting their best practices, leading to an epic debate that never ends. We were all starting to notice that there was something wrong with the error handling practices, but pinpointing the exact problems is challenging."

---

## What's Wrong with Current Practices

### The `std::error::Error` Trait: A Noble but Flawed Abstraction

Rust's `std::error::Error` trait makes a fundamental assumption: errors form a chain. Each error has an optional `source()` that points to the underlying cause.

This sounds elegant. In practice, it's often useless.

> Many errors don't naturally form chains. A validation error with multiple field failures, a timeout with partial results--these don't fit the single-chain model.

Reviewer: I think many errors do have no source or a single source that forms a chain. The issue here is that, as an std abstraction, `std::error::Error` is too opinionated to exclude cases where sources can form a tree, like the validation scenario described here.

```rust
fn provide<'a>(&'a self, request: &mut Request<'a>) {
    request.provide_ref::<Backtrace>(&self.backtrace);
}
```

The unstable `Provide`/`Request` API represents the latest attempt to make errors more flexible. The idea: errors can dynamically provide typed context (like HTTP status codes or backtraces) that callers can request at runtime.

This sounds powerful. In practice, it introduces new problems:

**Unpredictability**: Your error *might* provide an HTTP status code. Or it might not. You won't know until runtime.

**Dynamic typing**: You request an opaque `TypeId` and hope something provides it. You might get a `u16` status code... or you might not. The meaning is implicit, undocumented, and varies by error type.

**Complexity**: The API is subtle enough that [LLVM struggles to optimize multiple provide calls](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/96024).

Sometimes, a simple struct with named fields is better than a clever abstraction.

### thiserror: Categorizing by Origin, Not by Action

> thiserror makes it easy to define error enums:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `thiserror`: Categorizing by Origin, Not by Action

`thiserror` makes it easy to define error enums:
```

nit: equally quoting crate names.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum DatabaseError {
    #[error("connection failed: {0}")]
    Connection(#[from] ConnectionError),
    #[error("query failed: {0}")]
    Query(#[from] QueryError),
    #[error("serialization failed: {0}")]
    Serde(#[from] serde_json::Error),
}
```

> This looks reasonable. But notice how it categorizes errors: by *origin*, not by *what the caller can do about it*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This looks reasonable. But notice how this common practice categorizes errors: by *origin*, not by *what the caller can do about it*.
```

It's not `thiserror`'s fault, but the common pratice.

When you receive a `DatabaseError::Query`, what should you do? Retry? Report to the user? Log and continue? The error doesn't tell you. It just tells you which dependency failed.

> As one blogger [aptly put it](https://mmapped.blog/posts/12-rust-error-handling): *"This error type does not tell the caller what problem you are solving but how you solve it."*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As one blogger [aptly put it](https://mmapped.blog/posts/12-rust-error-handling): "This error type does not tell the caller what problem you are solving but how you solve it."
```

nit: the quote already emphasizes the content.

### anyhow: So Convenient You'll Forget to Add Context

> anyhow takes the opposite approach: type erasure. Just use `anyhow::Result<T>` everywhere and propagate with `?`. No more enum variants, no more `#[from]` annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `anyhow`: So Convenient You'll Forget to Add Context

`anyhow` takes the opposite approach: type erasure. Just use `anyhow::Result<T>` everywhere and propagate with `?`. No more enum variants, no more `#[from]` annotations.
```

> The problem? It's *too* convenient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem? It's *over* convenient.
```

nit: bikeshedding adverb - you make the final call.

Author: I'll prefer **too** for better pronunciation.

```rust
fn process_request(req: Request) -> anyhow::Result<Response> {
    let user = db.get_user(req.user_id)?;
    let data = fetch_external_api(user.api_key)?;
    let result = compute(data)?;
    Ok(result)
}
```

Every `?` is a missed opportunity to add context. What was the user ID? What API were we calling? What computation failed? The error knows none of this.

> The anyhow documentation encourages using `.context()` to add information. But when you're racing against a deadline, "I'll add context later" is the easiest lie to tell yourself. Later means never--until 3am when production is on fire.

Reviewer: I think a better argument here is that `.context()` is not a must, so developers can easily escape from their responsibility. In `exn`, `or_raise` requires a context.

---

## The Problem: Error Handling Without Purpose

Consider this common pattern in Rust codebases:

```rust
#[derive(thiserror::Error, Debug)]
pub enum ServiceError {
    #[error("database error: {0}")]
    Database(#[from] sqlx::Error),
    #[error("http error: {0}")]
    Http(#[from] reqwest::Error),
    #[error("serialization error: {0}")]
    Serde(#[from] serde_json::Error),
    // ... ten more variants
}
```

This looks reasonable. But ask yourself:

1. **What can the caller do with `ServiceError::Database`?** Can they retry? Should they show the raw SQL error to users? The error type doesn't help answer these questions.

> 2. **When debugging at 3 AM, does "serialization error: expected `,` or `}`" tell you which request, which field, which code path led here?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. When debugging at 3 AM, does "serialization error: expected `,` or `}`" tell you which request, which field, which code path led here?
```

nit: over emphasizing lost its purpose :P

> This is the fundamental disconnect in how we think about error handling. We focus on *propagating* errors correctly, on making the types line up, on satisfying the compiler. But we forget that errors are messages--messages that will eventually be read by either a machine trying to recover, or a human trying to debug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the fundamental disconnect in how we think about error handling. We focus on *propagating* errors exactly, on making the types line up, on satisfying the compiler. But we forget that errors are messages--messages that will eventually be read by either a machine trying to recover, or a human trying to debug.
```

It's not correctly, but exactly as is.

> ## The "Library vs Application" Myth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The Mythical Library vs. Application
```

This follows "The Mythical Man-Month"'s pattern.

> You've probably heard the conventional wisdom: *"Use thiserror for libraries, anyhow for applications."*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've probably heard the conventional wisdom: *Use `thiserror` for libraries, `anyhow` for applications.*
```

> It's a nice, simple rule. It's also not quite right. As [Luca Palmieri](https://lpalmieri.com/posts/error-handling-rust/): "It is not the right framing. You need to reason about intent."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a nice, simple rule, just not quite right. As [Luca Palmieri](https://lpalmieri.com/posts/error-handling-rust/): "It is not the right framing. You need to reason about intent."
```

        sleep(Duration::from_secs(1)).await;
        retry().await
    }
    Err(e) if e.kind() == ErrorKind::NotFound => {
        create_default().await
    }
    Err(e) => return Err(e),
    Ok(v) => v,
}
```

Notice the key design decisions:

**ErrorKind is categorized by response, not origin.** `NotFound` means "the thing doesn't exist, don't retry." `RateLimited` means "slow down and try again." The caller doesn't need to know whether it was an S3 404 or a filesystem ENOENT--they need to know what to do about it.

**ErrorStatus is explicit.** Instead of guessing retryability from error types, it's a first-class field. Services can mark errors as temporary when they know a retry might help.

**One Error type per library.** Instead of scattering error enums across modules, a single flat structure keeps things simple. The `context` field provides all the specificity you need without type proliferation.

No more traversing error chains, no more guessing from error types. Just ask the error directly.

### For Humans: Low-Friction Context Capture

The biggest enemy of good error context isn't capability--it's friction. If adding context is annoying, developers won't do it.

> The [exn](https://github.com/aspect-build/exn) library (841 lines of Rust, zero dependencies) demonstrates one approach: errors form a *tree* of frames, each automatically capturing its source location via `#[track_caller]`. Unlike linear error chains, trees can represent multiple causes--useful when parallel operations fail or validation produces multiple errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [exn](https://github.com/fast/exn) library (841 lines of Rust, zero dependencies) demonstrates one approach: errors form a *tree* of frames, each automatically capturing its source location via `#[track_caller]`. Unlike linear error chains, trees can represent multiple causes--useful when parallel operations fail or validation produces multiple errors.
```

AI hallucination?

Here's what we need:

**Automatic location capture.** Instead of expensive backtraces, use `#[track_caller]` to capture file/line/column at **zero cost**. Every error frame should know where it was created.

**Ergonomic context addition.** The API for adding context should be so natural that *not* adding it feels wrong:

```rust
fetch_user(user_id)
    .or_raise(|| AppError(format!("failed to fetch user {user_id}")))?;
```

Compare this to thiserror, where adding the same context requires defining a new variant and manual wrapping:

```rust
#[derive(thiserror::Error, Debug)]
pub enum AppError {
    #[error("failed to fetch user {user_id}: {source}")]
    FetchUser {
        user_id: String,
        #[source]
        source: DbError,
    },
    // ... one variant per call site that needs context
}

fn fetch_user(user_id: &str) -> Result<User, AppError> {
    db.query(user_id).map_err(|e| AppError::FetchUser {
        user_id: user_id.to_string(),
        source: e,
    })?
}
```

> **Enforce context at library / module boundaries.** This is where exn differs critically from anyhow. With anyhow, every error is erased to `anyhow::Error`, so you can always just `?` and move on--the type system won't stop you. The context methods exist, but nothing *forces* you to use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Enforce context at module boundaries.** This is where exn differs critically from anyhow. With anyhow, every error is erased to `anyhow::Error`, so you can always use `?` and move on--the type system won't stop you. The `.context` methods exist, but *nothing* prevents you from ignoring them.
```

Libraries are modules in the context. Let's keep the sentence simpler.

---
title: "Stop Forwarding Errors, Start Designing Them"
tags:
  - Error Handling

> pubDate: 2025-01-03

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pubDate: 2026-01-03
```

I'm reading the rest and hopefully finish before noon.

This article argues for a paradigm shift: **design errors based on their intended consumers**. Some errors need programmatic recovery (retry logic, HTTP status codes). Others need rich context for debugging. Many need both—and that's fine, because these approaches compose naturally.

```rust
// Anti-pattern: Just forwarding errors
#[derive(thiserror::Error, Debug)]
pub enum Error {
    #[error("serde error: {0}")]
    Serde(#[from] serde_json::Error),  // Caller can't do anything useful with this
}

// For recovery: flat error kinds with status
if err.kind() == ErrorKind::RateLimited && err.is_temporary() {
    retry_with_backoff().await;
}

// For debugging: rich context tree
// failed to process request, at server.rs:42:10
// |
// |-> failed to decode payload, at codec.rs:128:5
// |
// |-> invalid JSON at line 3 column 7, at parser.rs:89:12

// For both: structured error inside context tree, extracted via downcast
let http_status = exn.as_frame().as_any()
    .downcast_ref::<ApiError>()
    .map(|e| e.http_status)

>     .unwrap_or(500);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Bad - Just forwarding errors
#[derive(thiserror::Error, Debug)]
pub enum Error {
    #[error("serde error: {0}")]
    Serde(#[from] serde_json::Error),
    // The caller can rarely distinguish between different serde error variants.
    // Instead, the library author should convert it to something meaningful,
    // or a pre-formatted error message.
}

// Good - For recovery: flat error kinds with status
if err.kind() == ErrorKind::RateLimited && err.is_temporary() {
    retry_with_backoff().await;
}

// Good - For debugging: rich context tree
// failed to process request, at server.rs:42:10
// |
// |-> failed to decode payload, at codec.rs:128:5
// |
// |-> invalid JSON at line 3 column 7, at parser.rs:89:12

// Good - For both: structural error inside context tree, extracted via downcast
let http_status = exn.as_frame().as_any()
    .downcast_ref::<ApiError>()
    .map(|e| e.http_status)
    .unwrap_or(500);
```

The fundamental issue is that this error type was designed around *error sources* (database, HTTP, serde) rather than *error consumers* (retry logic, user-facing messages, developer debugging).

As noted in a [detailed analysis of error handling in RisingWave](https://bugenzhao.com/2024/04/24/error-handling-1/), a large Rust project:

> "There're tons of opinionated articles or libraries promoting their best practices, leading to an epic debate that never ends. We were all starting to notice that there was something wrong with the error handling practices, but pinpointing the exact problems is challenging."

## Two Consumers, Two Design Goals

Errors serve two distinct purposes, and understanding both is key to good design:

| Aspect | Automated Recovery | Human Debugging |
|--------|-------------------|-----------------|
| **Consumer** | Code (retry logic, fallbacks) | Developers, operators |
| **Needs** | Flat, matchable error kinds | Rich context, error path |
| **Anti-pattern** | Deeply nested error chains | Complex typed enums for display |
| **Good pattern** | Error kind + status flags | Simple types + context chain |

> | **Example** | `err.is_temporary()` | `"failed to X, at file:line"` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Example** | `err.is_temporary()` | `"failed to do X, at file:line"` |
```

nit: grammar

These aren't mutually exclusive—many systems need both. A request handler might need to set HTTP status codes (recovery) while also capturing the full error path for logs (debugging). The key is recognizing which needs apply at each layer of your system.

## The Ecosystem's Gaps

> ### `std::error::Error`: A Trait Without Direction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `std::error::Error`: A Rudderless Trait
```

nit: wording; @andylokandy you make the final call.

The standard `Error` trait assumes a model where errors form chains via `source()`:

```rust
pub trait Error: Debug + Display {
    fn source(&self) -> Option<&(dyn Error + 'static)> { None }
}
```

This design has several issues in practice:

> 1. **Verbose implementation**: Even simple errors require implementing `Debug`, `Display`, and potentially `source()`. As [one analysis notes](https://effective-rust.com/errors.html), "the Error trait is rather verbose to implement."

Reviewer: > the Error trait is rather verbose to implement.

I can't find this sentence in the referred page.

**Environment variable confusion**: [Issue #79561](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/79561) discusses how `RUST_BACKTRACE` being shared between panics and errors causes problems—you might want panic backtraces in production but not error backtraces due to performance.

### Provide/Request: Over-Engineering in Action

The [Provider API (RFC 3192)](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/96024) and [generic member access (RFC 2895)](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2895) add dynamic type-based data access to errors:

```rust
fn provide<'a>(&'a self, request: &mut Request<'a>) {
    request.provide_ref::<Backtrace>(&self.backtrace);
}
```

After years of discussion (the RFC was opened in 2020), concerns remain:

1. **Dynamic typing in a static language**: You're essentially doing runtime reflection, losing compile-time guarantees.

2. **Unpredictable behavior**: What a `provide` call returns depends on runtime state and implementation details.

> 3. **Optimization barriers**: [LLVM struggles to optimize multiple `provide_*` calls](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/96024) into efficient code.

Reviewer: You may link to the concrete comments or else an issue with over 100 comments is hard for readers digging.

Author: Done.

}
```

### Module-Level Error Types

Each module owns its error type:

```rust
// In crate::storage
pub struct StorageError(String);

// In crate::network
pub struct NetworkError(String);

// In crate::api
pub struct ApiError(String);
```

Cross-module calls use `or_raise()` to translate:

```rust
// In crate::api
pub fn handle_request(req: Request) -> Result<Response, ApiError> {
    let data = crate::storage::read_data(&req.path)
        .or_raise(|| ApiError("failed to handle request".into()))?;
    // ...
}
```

### Aggregating Multiple Errors

When operations can fail in multiple ways:

```rust
pub fn validate_config(config: &Config) -> Result<(), ValidationError> {
    let mut errors = Vec::new();

    if config.port == 0 {
        errors.push(Exn::new(FieldError("port must be non-zero".into())));
    }
    if config.host.is_empty() {
        errors.push(Exn::new(FieldError("host is required".into())));
    }

    if errors.is_empty() {
        Ok(())
    } else {
        Err(Exn::from_iter(errors, ValidationError("invalid configuration".into())))
    }
}
```

Output:

```
invalid configuration, at config.rs:45:10
|
|-> port must be non-zero, at config.rs:38:15
|

> |-> host is required, at config.rs:41:15

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application error, at main.rs:30:6
|
|-> invalid configuration, at config.rs:45:10
    |
    |-> port must be non-zero, at config.rs:38:15
    |
    |-> host is required, at config.rs:41:15
```

Perhaps add one more level to show that it's not a chain, but a chidren tree.

Author: I've removed this section to keep the main stream clear.
